Free Legal Assistance Act, N. 9999, 2010
Section 2. Declaration of Policy. - It is the declared policy of the State to value the dignity of every human person and guarantee the rights of every individual, particularly those who cannot afford the services of legal counsel. 

Furthermore, it is the policy of the State to promote a just and dynamic social order that will ensure the prosperity and independence of the nation and free the people from poverty through policies and programs that provide adequate social services and improve the quality of life for all. 

In addition, the State shall guarantee free legal assistance to the poor and ensure that every person who cannot afford the services of a counsel is provided with a competent and independent counsel preferably of his/her own choice, if upon determination it appears that the party cannot afford the services of a counsel, and that services of a counsel are necessary to secure the ends of justice and protect of the party.

Section 3. Definition of Terms. - As provided for in this Act, the term legal services to be performed by a lawyer refers to any activity which requires the application of law, legal procedure, knowledge, training and experiences which shall include, among others, legal advice and counsel, and the preparation of instruments and contracts, including appearance before the administrative and quasi-judicial offices, bodies and tribunals handling cases in court, and other similar services as may be defined by the Supreme Court

THE IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9710, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE “MAGNA CARTA OF WOMEN (2010)
SECTION 40. Commission on Human Rights – Consistent with its mandate, the CHR, as the Gender and Development Ombud (Gender Ombud), shall advocate for the promotion and protection of women’s human rights, strengthen its Human Rights Education program, investigate violations including those committed by private institutions or by private individuals, monitor compliance, and recommend appropriate measures to the CSC or to the concerned department of the government for its effective implementation.
A. The CHR shall:
(…)
3b. Forge Memoranda of Agreement with Bar Associations, NGOs, law firms, and organizations providing legal aid to ensure adequate and competent legal representation for complainants; 

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 163 DECLARING THE EFFECTIVITY OF THE CREATION OF THE COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS AS PROVIDED FOR IN THE 1987 CONSTITUTION, PROVIDING GUIDELINES FOR THE OPERATION THEREOF, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES (1987)
Section 3 The Commission on Human Rights shall have the following powers and functions: 
(…)
• Provide appropriate legal measures for the protection of human rights of all persons within the Philippines, as well as Filipinos residing abroad and provide for preventive measures and legal aid services to the under-privileged whose human rights have been violated or need protection;

Public Attorney’s Office Act, N. 9406, 2007
SEC. 2. Section 14, Chapter 5, Title III, Book IV of the same Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: 
“SEC. 14. Public Attorney’s Office (PAO). – The Citizen’s Legal Assistance Office (CLAO) is renamed Public Attorney’s Office (PAO). It shall exercise the powers and functions as are now provided by law for the Citizen’s Legal Assistance Office or may hereafter be provided by law. 
…“The PAO shall be the principal law office of the Government in extending free legal assistance to indigent persons in criminal, civil, labor, administrative and other quasi-judicial cases.”
