National Human Rights Commission Act (2001, amended thru 2016)
Article 47 (Request for Legal Aid for Victims) 
(1) The Commission may, if deemed necessary for the Commission's investigation or the securement of evidence or the recovery of rights of victims relating to any petition, request the Korea Legal Aid Corporation or any other institution to render legal aid to the said victims.
(2) No request for legal aid under paragraph (1) shall be made against the intent manifested by the relevant victim.
(3) Necessary matters concerning procedures, content and methods of legal aid under paragraph (1) shall be prescribed by the rules of the Commission.

Legal Aid Act of 1986, amended thru 2016
Article 1 (Purpose)
The purpose of this Act is to protect fundamental human rights and to further contribute to the promotion of legal welfare by providing legal aid to those in economic difficulty, or not adequately protected enough by the law due to ignorance of the law.

Article 2 (Definition)
The term "legal aid" in this Act means providing any person with all support concerning legal consultation, a representation of a lawsuit by an attorney-at-law or a public-service advocate as prescribed by the Public-Service Advocates Act (hereinafter referred to as a "public-service advocate") and other legal affairs, in order to achieve the purpose prescribed in Article 1.

Article 7 (Prohibition against Collection of Fees, etc.)
(1) No legal aid corporation, corporation or institution for which a public-service advocate has worked or is working, or person is in charge of legal aid services for such corporation or institution shall receive any fee or other money and goods, regardless of the title thereof under the pretext of legal aid services: Provided, That this shall not apply to costs of lawsuit, attorney-at-law fees, etc. prescribed by Presidential Decree. 
(2) Notwithstanding the proviso to paragraph (1), the State may bear costs of lawsuit and attorney-at-law fees for any of the following persons, as prescribed by Presidential Decree: 
(…)
7. A person with a disability as defined in Article 2 (2) of the Act on Welfare of Persons with Disabilities;

Article 8 (Establishment of Korea Legal Aid Corporation)
In order to advance legal aid efficiently, the Korea Legal Aid Corporation (hereinafter referred to as the "Corporation") shall be established.

Article 10 (Offices)
(…)
(2) The Corporation may establish its district offices at places where the district court is located, its local branch offices at places where the branch court is located and its branch offices at places where Si/Gun court is located as prescribed by the articles of association under Article 2 of the Act on the Establishment and Jurisdiction of Courts of Various Levels.

Article 21-2 (Protection of and Support for Victims of Crime)
In rendering legal aid services, the Corporation may legally protect and support victims of crime in order to properly guarantee the rights of such victims of crime and help them speedily restore from their damage.

Act on the Establishment and Jurisdiction of Courts of Various Levels of 1963, amended thru 1997.
Art. 2 (Establishment)
1) High courts, patent courts, district courts, family courts, administrative courts, branch courts of district courts and family courts, and juvenile courts shall be established in a manner as described in Table 1.
2) Si courts and Gun courts (hereinafter referred to as a “SI/Gun” court) shall be established in a manner as described in Table 2.