The Pakistan Bar Council Free Legal Aid Rules, 1999, amended to 2002
2. Definitions:
In these Rules unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context:
(1) “Act” means the Legal Practitioners & Bar Councils Act, 1973.
(2) “Poor”, “destitute”, “orphan”, “widow”, “indigent” and “deserving” means a person who is entitled to Zakat or his financial position and income resources are not sufficient to bear the expenses for engaging an Advocate to prosecute, defend and protect his legal rights in genuine litigation.

3. Scope of the Rules
(a) These Rules shall provide free legal aid to the poor, destitute, orphan, widows, indigent and other deserving litigants involved in the following categories of cases:--


5. Central Free Legal Aid Committee:
(b) It shall provide free legal aid to a deserving person or a litigant in the Supreme Court or any Tribunal, Authority and/or a Court functioning at federal level including the Wafaqi Mohtasib. 

6. Pakistan Bar Council Provincial Free Legal Aid Committees:
(3) The concerned Committee will provide free legal aid to deserving person/litigant in the High Court and/or Tribunal, Authority or Court functioning at the provincial level including the Provincial Mohtasib, functioning within its territorial jurisdiction.

7. Pakistan Bar Council District Free Legal Aid Committees:
(b) The District Committee shall provide free legal aid to a deserving person or a litigant in any Court or Tribunal or before any authority or Court functioning at the District level or sub-divisional level.

8. Applications For Free Legal Aid and their disposal:
(a) Any person desirous of free legal aid shall submit an application…for or against the suit, appeal or proceedings in a Court of law.

District Legal Empowerment Committees (Constitution & Functions) Rules, 2011
2. Definitions.—In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,—
(c) "Deserving litigant" means a litigant who might otherwise be unable to obtain legal aid or assistance for protecting his genuine legal rights or interests, involved in litigation, on account of his limited financial resources.
(e) "Legal aid" means free legal aid or assistance extended to a deserving litigant by the Committee in areas hereinafter prescribed.

5. Functions of the Committee.—(i) Subject to the provisions of any other law for the time being in force, the Committee shall extend funds for provision of legal aid to the deserving litigants. …

7. Procedure for Grant of Legal Aid.—
(ii) The Superintendent District Jail may also forward applications of the under trial or convicted prisoners, or any person confined in jail in relation to civil proceedings after necessary verification that the applicant is a deserving litigant.
(iii) The Committee may also consider cases referred by any Court for provision of legal aid to the person whose case is pending before such Court.

Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, amended to 2016
THE FIRST SCHEDULE - RULES
ORDER XXXIII - SUITS BY PAUPERS 
1. Suits may be instituted in forma pauperis. Subject to the following provisions, any suit may be instituted by a pauper. 
Explanation. A person is a "pauper" when he is not possessed of sufficient means to enable him to pay the fee prescribed by law for the plaint in such suit, or where no such fee is prescribed, when he is not entitled to property worth one thousand rupees other than his necessary wearing ¬apparel and the subject matter of the suit. 

Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, amended to 1997
4. Definition. (1) In this Code the following words and expressions have the following meanings unless a different intention appears from the subject or context: 
(r) 'Pleader'. 'Pleader', used with reference to any proceeding in any Court, means, a pleader or a mukhtar 
authorized under any law for the time being in force to practice in such Court, and includes (1) an advocate, a vakil and an attorney of a High Court so authorized, and (2) any other person appointed wit the permission of the Court to act in such proceeding; 
Pleader- With reference to any proceedings in the Court a pleader means a pleader or Mukhtar authorised under law for the time being in force and includes: 
(1) An advocate; 
(2) A vakeel or any attorney of High Court so authorised; 
(3) Any other person appointed with the permission of the Court. A co-accused can act as pleader if so permitted. Private person must get the prior permission. The discretion of the Court in permitting person to appear as 'pleader' must be exercised judicially with due regard to the interest of the party engaging him. 

340. Right of person against whom proceedings are instituted to be defended and his competency to be a witness. 
(1) Any person accused of an offence before a Criminal Court or against whom proceedings are instituted under this Code in any such Court, may of right be defended by a pleader. 

Destitute Litigant Fund Rules, 1974
2. In these rules, except as otherwise provided: 
(b) ―Court means the Lahore High Court. 
(c) ―Destitute means a litigant who has no means to pay court fee or any other legal charges in connection with a writ petition to be filed in the Court. 

6. On receipt of report from the Inquiry Officer the Authority may pass such order as it considers necessary for any financial assistance from the Fund or reject the application.
