Legal Aid Commission Act, N. 977, 2018
Establishment of the Commission
1. (1) There is established by this Act a body corporate with perpetual succession to be known as the Legal Aid Commission.

Object of the Commission
2. The object of the Commission is to provide legal aid to
(a) an indigent, and
(b) a person who has reasonable grounds to take, defend, prosecute or be a party to proceedings related to the Constitution in accordance with clause (1) of article 294 of the Constitution.

Functions of the Commission
3. (1) To achieve the object, the Commission shall pursuant to paragraph (a) of section 2
(a) determine
(i) a person or class of persons to whom legal aid may be granted; and
(ii) a matter or class of matters in respect of which legal aid may be granted.

Functions of the Public Defenders’ Division
22. The Public Defenders’ Division shall
(a) assist persons in need of legal assistance for the realisation of the right of equality before the law and to fair trial;
(b) act as a public defender for the realisation of articles 14, 17 and 19 of the Constitution;
(c) ensure that a person who is arrested, restricted, detained or accused of an offence is afforded the appropriate legal assistance;
(d) provide legal aid to a person in police or prison custody;
(e) provide legal aid for juveniles; and
(f) defend a person who is arrested, restricted, detained or accused of an offence
(i) who is indicted for the offence the punishment for which is imprisonment for life, or
(ii) who cannot afford the services of a lawyer.

Constitution, 1992, amended to 1996
14. PROTECTION OF PERSONAL LIBERTY 
1. Every person shall be entitled to his personal liberty and no person shall be deprived of his personal liberty except in the following cases and in accordance with procedure permitted by law- 
a. in execution of a sentence or order of a court in respect of a criminal offence of which he has been convicted; or 
b. in execution of an order of a court punishing him for contempt of court; or 
c. for the purpose of bringing him before a court in execution of an order of a court; …

17. EQUALITY AND FREEDOM FROM DISCRIMINATION 
1. All persons shall be equal before the law. 
2. A person shall not be discriminated against on grounds of gender, race, colour, ethnic origin, religion, creed or social or economic status. …

19. FAIR TRIAL
1. A person charged with a criminal offence shall be given a fair hearing within a reasonable time by a court. …

294. LEGAL AID 
1. For the purposes of enforcing any provision of this Constitution, a person is entitled to legal aid in connection with any proceedings relating to this Constitution if he has reasonable grounds for taking, defending, prosecuting or being a party to the proceedings.