Free legal aid
Article 3
In order to implement the provisions of Article 1 of the Constitution, the Ministry of Justice is responsible to appoint a legal aid provider to the poor at any stage of judicial proceedings in criminal cases. The manner of activity, organization, duties, competencies and other matters related to legal aid shall be regulated by a separate regulation.


Objectives
Article two
The purposes of this regulation are:
1- Providing the basis for providing reliable legal assistance and services to the destitute suspect who is accused, convicted, or innocent. …

Article three
Terms
The following terms in this Regulation have the following meanings:
10. Legal aid: Defending the rights of suspects, defendants, convicts and juveniles against the poor at every stage of the prosecution and defending the rights of children and poor and juvenile women in family cases and providing them with free legal services. .
11- Legal Advocacy: A lawyer who, considering the provisions of this regulation in criminal cases, defends the rights of the suspect, the accused, the convicted person and the juvenile against the poor at every stage of the prosecution, and in family cases the rights of children and poor women. 

Request for Legal Aid
Article five
(1) The impoverished person may request legal assistance from the authorities providing legal assistance as soon as he is caught or assigned inspiration at all stages of the prosecution….

Article seven 
Priority Right to Legal Aid 
(1) The authorities referred to in Article 6 of this Regulation are obliged to observe the right of priority when providing legal aid and determining legal aid for the following persons:
2. Victim of torture or rape without proof of entitlement.
2- Poor children, women, the innocent, persons with disabilities, returnees and internally displaced persons in criminal cases
3- For the poor child and woman in family cases۔
(2) Matters relating to the regulation and guidance of legal aid and the maintenance of balance in the prioritization of legal aid shall be regulated by a guideline approved by the High Commission for Legal Aid.

Article eight 
Rights of a Person Entitled to Legal Aid 
A person entitled to receive legal aid has the following rights:
…2- Enjoying immediate and effective legal assistance at any stage of the prosecution.

Article ten 
Duties and Obligations of Legal Aid Provider 
(1) Legal Aid provider have the following duties:
1- Providing legal assistance to the suspect, the accused with the convict against the poor and the innocent, and defending the rights of children and poor women in family cases.
2- Providing legal advice to suspects, accused or convicted, poor women and children …

The Rights of Victim: 
Article 6
The victim of violence has the following rights: 
4. Having advocate or legal aid provider. 

Obligation of Ministry of Justice: 
Article 12 
Ministry of Justice is bound to take the following protective measures in order to prevent violence: 
4. Assigning legal aid provider in case requested by the victim of violence.
